foreign
[Music]
died a good friend
said to me something that I was not
ready to hear at that time
he said death is the end of a life not
the end of a relationship yeah well that
gives me chills
welcome to the art of accomplishment
where we explore how deepening
connection with ourselves and others
leads to creating the life we want with
enjoyment and ease
laughs
anyone who's been alive for a while has
experienced grief in some form or
another and when it hits you it's not
always easy to see any practical value
in the experience let alone Beauty
welcome back everyone you may remember
my partner Alexa she's an anthropologist
and Coach who's active in our community
and you may remember her from our
episode on boundaries and today she and
Joe are going to explore the beauty of
grief I hope you enjoy it
hi Joe hi
good to be with you again
good to be with you so the topic I had
suggested for today is grief yeah
it's good timing for me my dad just
passed recently so I'm really
appreciative yeah
yeah it's very relevant in my life right
now as well but happily not not due to
death
um actually you know I'm currently on
hormones related to um
possibly creating life yeah
and it turns out that there's
a lot to let go of in that process as
well
um
that's true I think I think the most
important thing to start with is what
the hell do we mean when we say grief
because that can mean so many different
things to different people
I remember as I was thinking about this
interview I was asking different people
what you what you know what do you see
as grief and
my daughter when I asked her she's 13.
she means do you mean giving somebody
grief or do you mean like grief I was
like oh wow she's like that first
definition that first way of using the
word it's like I've hardly thought about
it in in years so
so I think that I think before I can
answer any of the questions I think it
would be good to set the
set the level of like what what the hell
are we talking about when we say grief
and um it was interesting so when I was
asking people I asked
my daughter asked a couple of folks and
my daughter my daughter's response to
grief was it's when you lose something
it's the feeling you have when you lose
something
that you don't want to lose
that was her experience of it and then I
was speaking to a friend who you know we
we had a lot of exploration together he
was actually the first person I ever
coached
and um we used to take walks on these
paths and he would every time I said
something that really got me to punch me
in the arm and so they had this
um very fun relationship and uh
and uh
and so I asked him what he his thought
process of grief was and
for him he said it's
this is this was his exact quote his
name is boss he said
it's like
if your foot falls asleep the experience
of it waking up again is grief
which is you know he's like it's this
thing that
like is is
um like a cleansing is like the more
aware you become there's this necessary
cleansing that happens
and that experiences grief
and
and they came and it was interesting to
listen to everybody because I was what I
was doing and asking the question was
testing my own
my own description of it in my
description of it is that
grief happens when there's a part of
your identity that is
goes away that's challenged
and and in it what's interesting is that
both of their two definitions correspond
to that in my world anyways and
and so for me it's um
let's say you take
the one experience I have with grief is
when I when I have this moment of
recognition of of something that's like
oh my gosh I've been
you know trying not to be abandoned for
20 years and I've done all these things
of not being in myself all these things
of hurting myself to not be abandoned
and I never had to do that
like there's a grief process I go
through yeah there's this experience and
it's and it is
an identity of that he who is abandoned
or he who can be abandoned or whatever
that identity is dying
and
and even though I see the freedom in it
there's this process of like oh that's
an identity and it's leaving and there's
a part of me that feels secure and safe
and that I don't want it to go and so
there's a grief process that happens in
that often for me there's when it hits
I'm like oh this is like a time of big
change for me when those kinds of big
grief processes hit and then there's the
grief process of
like your father dying or your
husband at 32 years old dying or your
child dying or your and
it's interesting because so we are
defined in large part by who we interact
with and what what roles we hold each
other in and
and so I see people who have had really
complicated relationships with their
father let's say and when they pass it's
like they're free of this emotional
and this like this way of being that
they were held into or there was an
agreement to hold into and so that
grief process looks one way and then
there's people I see who had a close and
intimate relationship with their father
and there's this part of their identity
is that closeness and
and then there's that grief process
which unfolds in a very different way
because it's different parts of their
identity that are
that are being removed and and I see
people who
um
you know especially like young lovers an
example would be like somebody's people
have been married that have a really
happy relationship and one of them dies
I'll see that that great process it's
like there's no getting over it there's
no like there's like you you move
forward with it but you don't get over
it because
they are always a part of your identity
and it's something that you want it's
like there's this part that's like
you're holding and
whereas other times there's a grief
process where there is a feeling of
getting over it because like that part
of your personality has moved and
there's a freedom to it and you're
grateful for what has happened but
you're not still like part of yourself
isn't
isn't identified in that way and nor do
you want it to be
so it's a so that that's how I come that
that's that's the way I reconcile what
grief is
and it's an emotional feeling
but it's not like sadness
sadness is a part of it
almost like sadness is the wrapper of it
but there's anger and fear and
helplessness there's a whole bunch of
denial and there's a whole bunch of
emotional experiences that come along
with grief absolutely it's not just
sadness yeah
well
I I really want to go into that but I
think this definition of grief is when
you lose a part of your identity
could be pretty hard for some people to
swallow
like Yeah Joe what part of it
what part of my identity is it when my
father died everyone has a father it's
not about my identity I miss him right
yeah yeah
yeah it's
like if
the way I would say that is like if you
had a non-relationship with your father
and
um you had healed all the dad issues or
a tremendous amount of the dot issues
that you might have had and you
aren't then that that isn't an intricate
part of your life and you've gotten to a
point where you can love them
unconditionally for who they are even
though they're maybe not what you want
them to be you're not going to have this
gigantic grief process whereas
if you
called them every day and asked for
advice and loved them
you're gonna have a much bigger grief
process because there's a part of you
that knows yourself in relationship to
them there's a part of you that it's not
I'm not saying by any stretch that it's
there's not a missing it's not about
them being important in your love for
them it is but that love for them is
part of the identity
and
and so
so I would say it like that I would say
it's not like
I would say maybe we're disagreeing on
the idea of what the identity like that
it's a bad thing or that it's personal
it's just the way that we relate to
ourselves and others and and that's
being challenged because all of a sudden
there's a way that we can't relate that
we're used to relating to ourselves and
others
and because it's either been stripped
from us or because we're letting go of
it
either because we broke up
or because they died or because we're
like oh this it doesn't work for me
anymore
or because I can now see it clearly for
the first time
yeah so I'm really interested in giving
some attention to those times when there
is grief that is not about death because
it really seems to me that death is
like the one time when we really allow
each other to grieve but there are so
many other things that have a big impact
on our identities and the way that we
relate to ourselves and others like
you're talking about yeah and
I see a lot of social pressure not to
grieve those things or at least not to
show it yeah so for instance one of the
things that's going on for me right now
that's really bringing up feelings is
well there's something going on
politically right now as we're recording
and I'm seeing a lot of people
especially uterus havers grieving and
I'm hearing women privately say that
they don't feel seen or supported in
their feelings but then I'm seeing a lot
of posts on social media like okay have
your feelings then fight
as if fighting isn't part of a feeling
um
yeah so I think yeah so yeah there's a
lot of topics in that one and just to
start the answer to the original
question that you asked
um I think there's a helplessness and
death that people don't know how to
contend with as much
so it's really easy oh you had a breakup
oh
Roe v way oh whatever
experience that's happening there's like
here's an action you can take here's
something you can do here's how you but
with death it's like you don't get to do
that like and so I think that's why
people behave differently around it the
more
the grief is there's more helplessness
in grief the more we feel incapable the
more
it's like I'm so sorry yeah instead of
like okay now we're gonna fight or
whatever it is so I think that's the
first part is that's my that's my
experience of it as to why
death has a different we handle the
grief of death differently I think the
other thing that you're tapping into
there which is I think there's a way to
say that like most of societal
most of societal maybe most of humans
pain and suffering comes from
unprocessed grief
oh
big statement yeah
I think there's if you think about it
the way I like think about it this way
that um when I talk about grief is the
identity
um it is people fight over their
identities I mean they even call it
identity politics and
you know we're Christian you're Muslim
or we're black you're white that's all
identity my way of thinking is right
your way of thinking is wrong
like all of that most of our conflict
boyfriend girlfriend conflict
is wrapped up in an identity of oh I'm
I'm going to be abandoned or I'm I need
to fight for myself or I need to
and so
so when I'm saying I'm processed grief
I'm saying that most of our fighting
comes because our identity hasn't been
dismantled in a way that creates peace
in our system and therefore we project
it out into the world
and so I when that when you have
societies there's like examples of these
in Eastern Africa and other places that
and the I don't have a huge amount of
experience there but when I
here read about these cultures where
they have grief rituals and they're
grieving individually when they're
grieving as groups
there is a lot less conflict and there's
like that's part of how they resolve
conflict if you look at
[Music]
um
South Africa when the when the apartheid
shifted they did this thing Truth and
Reconciliation and it was like it was
like a national grieving process and
and it allowed the transition to be very
different than it did say in the other
countries nearby that switched
um
and you know a lot less volatile
and so I think that that's those are
some examples of how grief has a huge
impact and families that can grieve
together
is like less compartmentalized emotions
less passive aggression or aggression
less Etc
so yeah so so again tying these two
threads together sort of
the importance of dismantling our
identities in this way and then
this thing where people are often
uncomfortable around others is grief
what do you think is being lost when
people are like
come on like look on the bright side
right right yeah
I don't want to experience your
emotional so I'm going to I don't want
to be with you in this emotion it's
uncomfortable for me so let me help fix
you out of your emotional state
yeah it's a lot being lost it's that's
that's the formation of future conflict
I wonder it's funny you were talking
about you know the Roe v Wade decision
that happened recently and I'm curious
like there's real grief on both sides of
that right I'm sure that there are
people who
cried for unborn children that grieved
for unborn children that
probably on a regular basis thought
about all those children that were
unborn children fetuses that were dying
and and had grief experiences and I am
sure that there are people right now
having grief experiences over the fact
that their rights are being taken away
that they're that they
that this one thing that helped save
their lives
you know as young women is not available
to others and or you know that whole
experience and
and so there's real grief on both sides
it's and and I think that
like our ability to see that and feel
that and be with each other in that is
the solution to the problem
not
one thing or like one way of handling it
or another way of handling it and it's
not in a law I don't think that there's
a law that's going to make this issue go
away either way
um for everybody I think there's a
there's grief on both sides of it oh I
see the truth in that
definitely goes so deep in our society
but I just know people are out there
like
but Joe that's too hard my identity
doesn't want to be challenged by really
being with somebody on the other side of
this
and even maybe
it's easier to just keep you know stay
in the fight
and like I I that's I I can almost
guarantee that was set on both sides
you know have your feelings yes and now
we're fighting for this and
Maybe not maybe just have your feelings
and then see what action comes out when
that has fully moved through you
right there's it yeah so it's an it's an
interesting thing and there's a
tremendous amount of identity
tied up in in all in all of it and I
think that there's this I think there's
another idea that comes into play when
you start talking about this where
people think to themselves
if I have the grief all the way then I
won't fight
like then I and
and maybe maybe you won't fight but it
doesn't mean that it you're not gonna
take action that
helps move the ball forward that you're
not going to be part of the process of
finding a
something that works for everybody
because you're not going to be part of a
situation where you're
finding uh
a way of being that
that can be good for everybody
yeah I find that really compelling yeah
and I you know it's like I don't think
that like um
yeah there's I definitely have noticed
in my own world I won't make a big
example out of this with some historical
figure but I have noticed in my own
world that when I fully grieve something
my actions become far more effective
and far less
um Power Dynamic far less like it's
either I'm controlling you or you're
controlling me
and I mean the example of this that I
use a lot is like in my
is in my marriage
where you know we've been through many
marriages together my wife and I and
um
and
there's times when we're where we've
been in it where it's like ah where I
have to grieve the marriage I have to
like assume that my marriage is lost and
I have to have that full I don't have to
I choose to have that full experience of
visualizing the marriage being done and
losing somebody who's incredibly
important to me
and in that process I
lose the identity that's getting in the
way of us being together
and in that process I can be true to
myself because I'm not scared of the
emotional experience of losing her
anymore because I've already gone
through it
and so I can be true and I can be myself
and I can be undefended and I can be
loving without having to
prove anything and then that allows the
relationship to heal
um
okay so that's really compelling again
and again it strikes me as being just
really Advanced Techniques like okay
sure but how
how do I do this
and for me really actually me you know
Joe that I lost a partner several years
ago
and now my partner today
yeah you know he has a very high risk
tolerance yes
yeah so I spend a lot of time afraid
that he'll die
and you know I I want that thing that
you're describing I want not to be
afraid all the time of losing him and
sometimes
I try to pre-grieve it
but it just seems so big
I I don't know how to get there how do I
grieve someone that I have not in fact
lost
um yeah that's a great question
I don't know how to describe how to have
emotions very well I I can say that
one of the things that I would ask
myself if I were in your shoes is what
would what would I have to feel if I
couldn't feel the fear
if the fear is like constantly coming up
and not moving then I would say that
there's an emotion underneath that
is looking to be felt
whether it's
anger at him for continuing to take the
risks or anger at yourself or
um you know finding another man that
could could die or whether it's
um sadness over is some unresolved
sadness
um
you know there's helplessness all those
experiences so I would I to me it's like
it is the the fear of motion is Cottons
preventing some fluidity in the system
and so
um also you know you can you know some
of the breathing techniques that can
really help bring some of the emotions
forward and they're all there it's
it's more a matter of like
I mean
worst case scenario you can just fake it
and it and it and it can open up a
channel so
um
you can
say oh maybe it's these three emotions
and I'm gonna go and experiment with
them and I'm gonna play the part of an
actor and and I think this is this is a
this is a very specific nuanced way and
it's and it works really well so I just
want to say how specific it is and so
it's the idea is that I'm gonna play the
role of myself
being angry
I'm not going to lose my
the idea that I'm an actor and that this
is just a performance but I also am
going to try to make it the most
convincing performance
and that experience
is can often open up the floodgates and
allow for the for the stuff that's
really in there out
because a lot of the times it's it's
um it's having the emotional experience
is not
um
resisted
in the head it's resisted in the body
and so if you
act as if
and then the body
it's like it starts blurring whether to
be scared of this emotion anymore or
like it allows for a certain level of
safety that then the body can go okay
yeah let's do this
oh yeah that's that's certainly been
true for me
um yeah something that Brett and I and
our roommate in early lockdown did kind
of almost on Instinct was
um Brett led us through
something that he learned from you I
believe the six positions yeah yeah
um where you embody each of these six
different emotional states and then I
just had this idea to take it on into
the seven positions of grief the seven
stages of grief but embodying each one
of them
so I just looked those up on my phone
and for about one minute each
um like per stage of grief we embodied
one of these and all three of us had
these really big emotional movements
that's awesome yeah
um yeah so that that exercise is one of
many exercises
that are about helping us with emotional
fluidity which I think is you know if
you're thinking about the heart the work
of the heart instead of the head or the
gut
there's kind of two main components of
it one is to learn how to be undefended
in your love
unconditional in your love and the other
part is emotional fluidity allowing all
the emotions and
letting them move through you and you
can literally the six positions is one
of the ways that it's all about like oh
I'm going to experience I'm going to
embody certain emotional things just
like I would a stretch and and that
allows more fluidity because I'm
stretching my capacity to have emotional
experiences
and so I had never thought about how to
I've never had the concept of oh let's
do this like in the stages of grief and
the stages of grief themselves they
don't entirely resonate with me or they
do and they don't meaning I think that
you do experience all of those or
there's a good chance to experience all
those I'm not I've noticed that people
don't always experience them in that
order and sometimes I mean not always in
that order yeah and also sometimes
some of them don't happen for some
people's grief process and other ones do
and but I think that it's a really nice
map of a territory that you know is a
little bit like an Escher map where you
can you need to turn it to the right way
to see the perspective that's helpful to
you but
um but yeah that's a really really cool
idea I'm immediately thinking about how
you could use that same principle okay
what are the emotional arcs that people
take under different circumstances and
how do you put them in some sort of
order so that it allows for the full
movement that's a great idea yeah
and and I think I think the thing for
people who are listening just to
um the general idea behind the six
positions is that there are six
emotional experiences and you put your
body find a place that your body
your body wants to go there when you're
in that emotional place or you evoke
that experience through that body
position
so an easy one of these to think about
is like as a kid and you're yearning you
always have your hands up in the sky
you're looking up it's like hey lift me
up Mom hey Lift Me Up mom that physical
experience creates an emotional reaction
in you and then the idea is to amplify
and like allow those all those emotions
to move through you
yeah so the way that I have done this
grief ritual is it's the seven stages of
grief according to me which by the way I
don't think that even the original
author of the seven stages of grief had
any intention that they were going to be
linear or that you were going to go
through them in any particular order
um but yeah so for me it's sadness
fear
anger
maybe shock maybe denial
acceptance
into gratitude hmm
that's nice
yeah yeah I also think it relates in
some ways to something you said earlier
that I wanted to double click on also
which was that grief just tends to be
really complex yeah yeah that's the
thing I was thinking about like
that ritual is like such a beautiful
idea of like how to prime the pump you
know like oh we can do this and we can
have these experiences and
when grief moves fluidly it can go from
anger to sadness to anger to sadness to
anger to sadness to fear to anger to
sadness like it like
there's just an interesting way that it
moves where you know different waves
come through at different times it's not
it's not as what do you call it it's not
as um it's not as linear logical as we
would like it to be
or some of us would like it to be
right
yeah I know that
um
after Brian died
you know it took me probably at least
six months just to move on from sort of
the acute stage of grieving yeah you
know it's never perfect I mean I'm sure
that
if my if I had just read my wife and our
marriage and then we actually did get a
divorce it would be you know there would
be more stuff there
but it does allow for the movement it
does allow for
um more clarity every every part of the
process allows for more clarity and when
the when when you get to the point that
you can listen to the body and and like
for me there's this process of
my brain will say things for each
emotional state
um oh there's no reason to be angry I
mean why would you be angry at someone
who just died you know or
um hasn't this gone long long enough or
shouldn't you have grieved more by now
or
there's so many things that the brain
says and
my
my relationship with that is oh so cool
I've heard from you a lot I've lived
with that I'm gonna just listen to my
body I'm just gonna listen to the grief
right now I'm just gonna follow the
grief that'll be my that's what I'm
going to surrender into for a while
and I don't really
the mind doesn't know how to like the
mind's relationship with emotion with
the emotions or is usually pretty wonky
for most people unless they really have
had a lot of
a lot of work with the emotions the the
mind just doesn't really know like I
love when someone says like
when they say something like um
like it's like it there's no
justification for that emotion you know
there's no it's not logical to be sad
about this it's like yeah the emotions
are definitely never lie it's not
logical to be happy or joyful it's like
yes correct like that so to me it's
about listening to the body and and
allowing the emotions without commenting
on him not having some sort of Head trip
around it
I love the mind but just it's not
equipped to handle emotions very well it
just thinks its job is to manage them
right it doesn't work yeah no but it's
hard if you grew up in our society to
let that management go in part because
people just expect each other to be in
the managing
it's actually this is one of the reasons
that I wanted to talk to you about this
topic
um
you know because of the circumstances
for me
around Brian's death
I processed my grief a lot by writing
and so a lot of people saw what I wrote
like on Facebook and as a result of that
people reached out to me for many years
when something would happen in their
lives or their friends lives and that
was really great in a lot of ways
um
I really got to be there
for a lot of people
and a lot of people my age didn't really
know very much about
you know about acute grief
but I did have a couple of experiences
that were uh leaving something to be
desired so
um I had I had one one experience with
somebody that I didn't know that well
who reached out to me when his wife died
and we talked about some of these topics
and how you can really let yourself have
all of the emotions that come as part of
grieving including anger
yeah and we had this conversation and he
was like no no it's inappropriate for me
to have anger
[Laughter]
and I was like come on man your wife
died
really young of cancer at least you can
be angry at cancer yeah yeah start
somewhere
and then pretty soon after that
he called me again and he was like hey
thanks so much for talking to me and
based on your Sage advice yeah I know uh
oh uh oh I didn't mean advice
um based on your Sage advice I really
let somebody have it on the airline
today
and I was like oh that's not what I
meant
yeah that happens a lot
um
yeah that absolutely and what's
interesting is that there's nobody who
goes through the grief process very few
people who go through the grief process
without like shame and they'll shame
themselves for the exact opposite I'm
not crying enough
I'm crying too much this that happened
too quickly this [__] happened this
shouldn't have taken so long and you
know oh
I can't be angry but I can be sad oh I
can be angry but I can't be sad like
everybody seems to like on in some level
question their grief process you know
recently was with them
a woman who had
lost her husband after 53 years and
and a woman who like sadness doesn't
move far easily it's been pretty
compartmentalized and anyways she she
was just saying you know I I don't want
to admit it but I feel relief I'm like
you know it's it's okay to feel relief
and immediately she started to tear up
and then immediately she shut it down
and so what's interesting is we tell
ourselves that one of the emotional
states that we feel is not okay in the
process but what that does is it shut
down it shuts down all the other ones
too
and so it's like or or it makes them
spin it makes it like oh and I'm still
scared and I'm still scared or I'm still
sad and I'm still sad
when we tell ourselves that we can't
have one of the emotions and because
what because they're illogical or
because of it's it's not appropriate or
blah blah blah blah but if you're not
doing them at anybody they're all
appropriate they're all great
they all offer relief
yeah
I don't know how many times by the way
I've had my no matter how often I'm like
do not but I do not recommend and nor do
I suggest putting your anger on somebody
or your sadness on somebody or at them
somebody still hears it is oh cool I
have permission to yell at somebody to
yell at people
no you're just shame you're just
creating a cycle of anger and shame you
know but yeah
yeah so you're not alone in that
having you
thanks I appreciate that
um and and actually it strikes me that
when you're sort of like looking out at
this this big scary sort of cloud of
grief ahead of you
maybe it's actually easier to create a
cycle of anger and shame because that's
something that you're used to as opposed
to moving on into the rest of your grief
yeah I I so I had one of my mentors case
passed
and it was unexpected in a weird way
because he had cancer but he was healing
the cancer and then died of a heart
attack and
it was really interesting his death
taught me a tremendous amount maybe even
as much as his life did
and so the first thing I learned from
his death was you know I asked for a a
circle of his friends
and his very close friend got very angry
at me for asking for that but I asked
for it and it happened and
everybody there was like 25 people and I
was kind of halfway through and it was
like sadness sadness sadness sadness
sadness and that was the appropriate
thing and I just [__] got so angry I
was so pissed there was no reason for it
of course and and you could just see the
whole room like went to another level it
was sitting there in the whole room and
nobody would express it
then the expression of that anger
allowed for so much more death and
movement to happen in the room and and a
variety of emotional experiences
so that was one of the things I learned
and in that process yeah one of the
other things I learned in that process
was that the more story there is and we
have that episode about
story The More Story there is the
more conflated the grief process becomes
so
I think this one's really critical
for people understanding the group
process so
like I noticed if somebody had the story
he died too young
or even if they had the story he died
perfectly it was like the right it just
happened just right or
the story of I never got to know him as
much as I wanted to or
um the more that that story was there
it's almost like saying the more the
identity was there the the the slower
that grief process was for them the more
that they were caught up in it um
not that it's wrong that a grief process
is slow or quickly but there's just like
it was just more convoluted
um
so that was an interesting thing to just
watch
and then the other thing that I I I
learned through that process of of
grieving him was that when he passed
he was a person who was like in a
similar position to me in the world as
far as like being a coach and
to people and when he passed
one of two things happened either the
people that he was serving collapsed
they were dependent on him and they
collapsed and their life went you know
back to the where it was before him and
some of them
it was like it was freed he would
because he was no longer there to
you know because he didn't need to be
needed in their lives anymore the the
this huge Freedom happened to them and
there was this explosion of creativity
and capacity that happened in their
lives
it was really interesting to see that
process at play of of
how his identity held their identities
in place in different ways the same
identity from him which is was needing
to be needed
and it was important to him to help
people
[Music]
um
how for some of those people it kept
them
unempowered and from some of those
people that it prevented them from
having the full expression of themselves
it was really interesting to watch
and I
yeah and uh and so it's it's interesting
and I think that grief process and
it was like yes that's that is the
identity shedding in different ways and
the the identity holding pattern between
people
you know that hopefully if you're in a
really good relationship that is
constantly a question you're constantly
changing the way that you interact with
each other and your identities are
constantly shifting towards each other
but we do we do have that tendency to
hold each other's identity in place it's
why we don't do couples and
groundbreakers typically
because it's like harder for someone to
transform when somebody who is
has a lot at stake with their
transformation is in the room yeah which
again points back at your suggestion to
grieve a relationship that you're in on
a regular basis
yeah
so
the thing that's coming up for me now is
it seems like we've talked about all
these different components of the grief
process
but I'm not sure we've really talked
about what is beautiful about grief
yeah I mean my friend said it really
well right it's the the feeling that you
have when you realize that your leg's
been asleep and you're waking it back up
like there is a
there's a freedom on the other side of
the identity
and their
there's an implied love and care
we don't grieve for things that we don't
have love and care for
and so it's a far more direct and
intimate conversation or experience far
more direct and intimate experience of
love and care
it's like you're you're not
when I talked about emotional fluidity
and I said
are about the heart about like the work
of the heart and it's the emotional
fluidity and it's the undefended love
the grief allows us to be far more
undefended in our love
you know the grief the grief allows us
to be have that empowered what I would
call empowered love where we're not
running away from ourselves or leaving
ourselves to be loving and we're not
defending ourselves with the idea that
the other person's lack of Love Can Hurt
us
we're accepting that I talk about that
in another phrase where I say him
every time we allow our hearts to break
it increases our capacity to love
so yeah life the more we grieve the more
loving
the more peace
the less I less you know identity is
holding us away from Who We Are
I love that
I'm I'm amused how much of this
interview has been about identity that
was really unexpected for me on this
topic
there is something else moving in me
let's see
uh yeah it's this
so when my partner Brian died
a good friend said to me
something that I was not ready to hear
at that time
he said death is the end of a life not
the end of a relationship yeah that
gives me chills yeah and at that moment
I was pretty much like
how dare you say that our relationship
is clearly over yeah
yeah
as we're talking about him now years
later right right yeah
yeah
so
eventually I moved into a lot more of
the grieving process out of that initial
place
and now I see very clearly that
the rest of that process allowing all
those different parts in into my
awareness into what I was doing in life
at that moment and sometimes it was like
I was putting my face on the floor and
this thing that's happening now with my
face on the floor and whatever kinds of
sobs and weird sounds that are coming
out of me
is a development in my relationship with
Brian
yeah
that's a so incredibly beautifully said
and it's interesting because
I would say because of that grief
process that you went through with Brian
you
show up differently for Brett yes like
without that you would have showed up
differently and so his relationship with
you that continued relationship even now
it affects the relationships that you
have
and and your grief is changing your
relationship with him as well meaning
like I would my assumption would be that
your relationship with Brian is far more
clean now
and and so it's it and and to Pivot that
to like non-death is I I don't know if
I've told the story maybe I have had a
close friend who was like
drinking too much business was going to
[__] had a girlfriend
lifestyle was bad habits were bad
girlfriend broke up with him it was the
love of his life he mourned
he wasn't going to I was like this is
what you got to do bro it was it was
young I gave advice and I was like
probably that's what you gotta do you
gotta like mourn the [__] out of this
and so
he
would drive to Yuma Arizona every day
every once a week he'd drive there once
a week he'd drive back and he would just
he's like I cannot I can't tell you the
sounds that are coming out of me like I
wouldn't even thought those sounds were
possible and it was just this wailing
and anger and
fear and shaking that would happen in
this car ride in this big open desert
six months later he's not drinking he's
in shape he his business is going well
his like and when I was talking to him
about it he goes yeah first I was
mourning
the loss of the girlfriend and then I
was mourning everything that allowed me
to be in that relationship everything
that had it so that I
was seeking the love and running after
the love and instead of receiving the
love all you know the relationships with
my parents like he just mourned
far beyond the loss of this one thing
and to everything that allowed for that
in his life
totally transformed his life and I can't
tell you there's countless stories I
know
of people
grieving like that and that's what I
mean by like
that like how much of his
like
pain and suffering that for him and that
he caused other people and his drinking
and there's bad habits are in the failed
business or how much of that was just
grief how much of that was just unfelt
grief
and
yeah it's an amazing thing and
so anyway yeah that's the yeah that's
so beautiful that that's exactly what I
was trying to point at yeah I see
and and oddly not dissimilar to your
experience with Brian
you know like there's a
yeah one's a death one's a you know a
loss they're both losses one's a death
but the experience is really the same
right
there's differences but there's
something very similar there is and
there are differences but I actually
feel much more clearly now since Brian's
death that breakups are absolutely worth
grieving and grieving
deeply
yeah and there's really something being
lost when people are like nope I'm fine
I'm moving on
yeah
I I think it's even more practical than
that like if someone was like
okay I broke up with somebody and I
didn't grieve it I would say Okay 90
chance if not more that you will date
somebody almost identical to the person
you dated last time
if you grieve it if you grieve it and
really go into it zero percent chance
you're gonna date the same person with a
different name next time
and so
so it's just like there's also some
really practical implications of grief
yeah want to tell us about any more of
those practical implications well it's
the same thing in in like the idea
between the people not grieving the
the Roe v way thing on either side it's
like they're recreating the cycle
instead of moving to the next cycle
without the grief
without the grief we recreate the cycle
without the grief we relive the trauma
without the grief we don't find the
freedom on the other side of the limited
identity limited identity meaning ego
right whether it's ego of like I'm so
great or ego if I'm so bad still ego
still identity still limitation and we
recreate those patterns without the
grief
yeah that's really beautiful
this conversation has had a really nice
Arc uh is there anything else that you
wanted to discuss today no I was just
thinking go wow that's the end isn't it
like that I just felt like what [__]
yeah
okay then thank
you thank you what a pleasure
thanks for listening to the art of
accomplishment if you enjoyed what you
heard today please subscribe and rate US
on your podcast app we'd love your
feedback so feel free to send us
questions or comments you can reach out
to us join our newsletter or check out
our courses at Art of accomplishment.com
foreign
[Music]